<frontmatter>
  title: "Best Practices: Data Migration"
</frontmatter>

# Data Migration Best Practices

Data migration is necessary when a new, possibly backwards-incompatible, schema is introduced in the code base.

## Making code work for both schemas

Initially, the breaking change should be written such that it works for both the old data schema and the new data schema. This can be done in two ways:

* Using [Objectify lifecycle annotation `@OnLoad`](https://github.com/objectify/objectify/wiki/LifecycleCallbacks)
  * In this lifecycle call, one could convert data in the old schema to the new schema.
  * However, it would be difficult to write client script to migrate the old schema to the new schema as all entities loaded by Objectify in the client script will be in new data schema because of the lifecycle call. Therefore, it is hard to differentiate the data in old schema and the data in new schema.

* Using Getter and Setter
  * This is the **recommended** way to convert data from the old schema to the new schema. It allows you to storage data in the new schema without knowing the underlying data schema.
  * In doing this, data migration script can use Java Reflection to determine whether it is old data or not and convert it accordingly.

## Interchangeability between consecutive versions

It is undeniable that the version using old data schema should be interchangeable with the immediate next version using the new data schema. This is why it is important to write code that works for both schemas.

In addition, it is also important to make sure the code work for both the version tailored for the old data schema and the **immediate** next version without hacks of the old schema.

For example, a field `isInNewDataSchema` is introduced to take care of the old schema. It will be imprudent to remove the field in the immediate next version after the client script is run as all data generated by the new version will have this field missing and be *wrongly* treated as data in old schema in the old version.
In the immediate next version, the field should be marked to `true` although it has no usage. In the version after the immediate next version, the field can be safely removed. That is, we should make any two consecutive versions interchangeable at **ALL** times.
